I want to talk to you about two of the
most exciting possible things you've
probably guessed what they are data and
history right so I'm not a historian I'm
not going to give you a definition of
history but let's think instead of
history within a framework so when we're
making history or when we're creating
historical documents we're taking things
that have happened in the past and we're
stitching them together into a story so
let me start with a little bit of my own
story like anybody my age who works
creatively with computers I was a
popular socially well-adjusted young man
and sporty sporty young man and like a
lot of people my age in the kind of
business that I'm in I was influenced
tremendously by Apple but notice my
choice of logo here right the Apple on
the left not the Apple on the right I'm
influenced as much by the apple on the
right is the other person as the next
person but the Apple on the Left I mean
look at that logo it's a rainbow it's
not even in the right order that's how
crazy Apple was but I don't want it I
don't want to talk too much about the
company I'll start talking about a
machine though how amazing it is it to
think about this and I go back and I
think about this Wednesday one Wednesday
when I was about 12 years old I didn't
have a computer on Thursday I had a
computer can you imagine that change
it's so drastic I can't even think about
anything that could change our lives
that way but I'm actually not even going
to talk about the computer I'm going to
talk about a program that came loaded on
that computer and it was built by not
the guy on the left but the guy on the
right does anybody know the guy on the
right is nobody ever knows the answer to
this question this is Bill Atkinson
and Bill Atkinson was responsible for
tons of things that you see on your
computer every day but I want to talk
about one program that Bill Atkinson
wrote called HyperCard yeah I got
someone's cheering over there so hyper
guard was the program that shipped with
the Mac and it was designed for users of
the computer to make programs on their
computers crazy idea today these
programs were not the apps that we think
about today with their large budgets and
their big distribution these were small
things people making applications to
keep track of their local basketball
team scores or to to to organize their
research or to teach people about
classical music or to calculate we're
distraught astronomical dates and and
then of course there were some art
projects this is my favorite one it's
called if monks had Macs and it's a
nonlinear kind of exploratory
environment I think I think the stars
for HyperCard all of the time and I
think the stars were putting me in this
era where I got to use hypercard
HyperCard was the last program to ship
on a public computer that was designed
for the users of a computer to make
programs with it if you talk to the
people who invented the computer and you
told them there would be a day a magical
day when everybody had a computer but
none of them knew how to program they
would think you were crazy so let's get
forward a few years and I'm starting my
career as an artist and and I'm building
things with my computer small scale
things investigating things like the
growth systems of plants or in this
example I'm building a simulated economy
in which pixels are trading color with
one another trying to investigate how
these types of systems work and just
kind of having fun and then this project
led me to start working with data so I'm
building graphics like this which would
compare communism the frequency of usage
of the word communism in the New York
Times to terrorism at the top so you see
terrorism kind of appeared this time as
communism is going away and with these
graphics that was really interesting
in the aesthetic of the graph so this is
Iran in Iraq it reads like a clock it's
called a timepiece graph and it is
another timepiece graph overlaying
despair I think over hope and there's
only three times a crisis over hope
there's only three times when crisis
ellipses help we're in the middle of one
of them right now but don't think about
that too much and and finally the
culmination of this work with the New
York Times data a few years ago was the
the attempt to combine an entire year's
news cycle into a single graphic so
these graphics actually show us a full
year of news all the people and how
they're connected into a single graphic
and from there I started to be
interested in again in a more active
system so here's a project called just
landed where I'm looking at people
tweeting on Twitter hey I just landed in
Hawaii you know how people just casually
try to sneak that into their Twitter
conversation I'm not showing off really
yet but I did just land in Hawaii and
and then I'm plotting those peoples
trips and in hopes that maybe we could
use social network and the data that it
leaves behind to provide a model of how
people move which would be valuable to
epidemiologists among other people and
the more fun this is a similar project
looking at people seeing good morning to
each other all around the world which
taught me by the way that it is true
that people in Vancouver on the west
coast wake up much later and say good
morning much later than the people on on
the East Coast who are more adventurous
and here's a more useful maybe project
and where I took all the information
from the Kepler project and tried to put
it into some visual form that made sense
to me and I should say that everything
I've showed you up to now these are all
things that I just do for fun they might
seem weird but I'm this comes back from
HyperCard right and building tools for
myself I may share them with a few other
people but they're there for fun they're
for me so all these tools I show you the
kind of occupy this weird space
somewhere between science art and design
and that's where my practice lies and
still today from my experience with
HyperCard when I'm doing is I'm building
visual tools to help me understand
systems so today I work at the New York
Times
and the data artist-in-residence at the
new york times and i've had an
opportunity the times to work on a
variety of really interesting projects
two of which i'm going to share with you
today the first one i've been working on
in conjunction with with mark Hanson
mark Hanson is a professor of statistics
at UCLA he's also a media artist and
Mark came to the Times with a very
interesting question to what may seem
like an obvious problem when people
share a content on the Internet how does
that content get from person a to person
B or maybe person a to person B to
person to C to person D we know that
people share content in the Internet but
what we don't know is what happens in
that gap between one person to the other
so we decided to build a tool to explore
that and this tool is called cascade so
if we look at these these systems that
that start with one event that leads to
other events we call that structure of
Cascade and these cascades actually
happen over time so we can model these
things over time now the New York Times
has a lot of people who share their
content so the Cascades do not look like
that one they look more like this so
here's a typical cascade at the bottom
left the very first event right and then
and then as people are sharing the
content from one person to another we go
up in the y-axis degrees of separation
and over on the x-axis for time so we're
able to look at that conversation in a
couple of different views this one which
shows us the threads of conversation and
this one which combines that stacked
view with that view that lets us see the
threads now The Times publishes about
7,000 pieces of content every month so
it was important for us when we were
building this tool to make it an
exploratory one so the people could dig
through this vast terrain of data and I
think of it as a vehicle that we're
giving people to traverse this really
big terrain of data so here's what it
really looks like and here's a cascade
playing in in real-time and I have to
say this was a tremendous moment we'd
been working with with um can data fake
data for so long that when we saw this
for the first moment it was like we was
like an archaeologist he would just dust
ah these dinosaur bones and we
discovered this thing and we were seeing
it for the first time these sharing
structures that underlie the internet
right and then the dinosaur analogy is a
good one because we're actually making
some probabilistic guesses about how
these things linked so we're looking at
some of these pieces and making some
guesses but we try to make sure that
those are a statistically rigorous as
possible now tweets in this case they
become parts of stories they become
parts of narratives so we are building
histories here but they're very short
term histories and sometimes these very
large Cascades are the most interesting
ones but sometimes the small ones are
also interesting this is if it might of
my favorites we call this the rabbi
cascade it's a conversation amongst
rabbis about this article in in the New
York Times about the rule in fact that
religious weight workers don't get a lot
of time off I guess Saturdays and
Sundays are bad days for them to take
off so so in this cascade there's a
group of Rabbis having a conversation
about a New York Times story one of them
has the best Twitter name ever it's
called The Velveteen Rabbit and and but
we would have never found this if it
weren't for this exploratory tool right
this would just be sitting somewhere and
we would have never been able to see
that but this exercise of taking single
pieces of information and building
narrative structures building histories
of the out of them I find tremendously
interesting you know I moved to New York
about two years ago and in New York
everybody has a story that surrounds
this tremendously impactful event that
happened on September 11th of 2001 in my
own story with September 11th has really
become a more intricate one because I
spent a great deal of time working on a
piece of the 9/11 memorial in Manhattan
so the central idea about the 9/11
memorial is that the names in the in the
memorial are not laid out in
alphabetical order or chronological
order but instead they're laid out in a
way in which the relationships between
the people who were killed are embodied
in the memorial brothers are placed next
to brothers
coworkers are placed together so this
memorial actually considers all of these
myriad connections that were part of
these people's lives so I worked with a
company called local projects to work on
an algorithm and a software tool to help
the architects build the layout for the
memorial I had almost 3,000 names and
almost 1500 of these adjacency requests
these requests for connections so a very
dense story a very dense narrative that
becomes an embodied part of this
memorial so working with Jake Barton we
produce this software tool which allows
the architects to first of all generate
a layout that satisfied all of those
adjacency requests but then second make
little adjustments where they needed to
to tell the stories did they want it to
tell so this memorial I think has an
incredibly timely concept in our era of
social networks because these networks
these real life networks that people
make up people's lives are actually
embodied inside of the memorial and one
of the most tremendously moving
experiences is to go to the memorial and
see how these people are placed next to
each other so that this memorial is
representing their own lives what how
does this affect our lives well I don't
know if you remember but in the spring
there was a controversy because it was
discovered that on the iPhone and
actually on your computer we're storing
a tremendous amount of location data so
Apple responded saying this was not
location data about you it was location
data about wireless networks that were
in the area where you are so it's not
we're about you but it's about where you
are so this is a this is very valuable
data it's like gold to researchers right
this mobility data human mobility data
so what we thought we thought man how
many people have iPhones how many of you
have I phones so in this room we have
this tremendous database of location
data that researchers would would really
really like so we built this system
called open paths which lets people
upload
their iPhone data and broker
relationships with researchers to share
that data to donate that data to people
that I can actually put it to use so
open pass was a great success as a
prototype we we received thousands of
data sets and we built this interface
which allows people to actually see
their lives unfolding from these traces
that are left behind on your devices now
what we didn't expect we didn't expect
was how moving this experience would be
when I uploaded my data I thought big
deal I know where I live I know where I
work what am I going to see here well it
turns out what I saw was that moment I
got off the plane to start my new life
in New York right the restaurant where I
had Thai food that first night thinking
about this new experience of being in
New York the day that I met my
girlfriend right this is LaGuardia
Airport this is this Thai restaurant on
Amsterdam Avenue this is the moment I
met my girlfriend see how that changes
the first time I told you about those
stories and the second time I told you
about those stories because what we do
in the tool inadvertently is we put
these pieces of data into a human
context and by placing data into a human
context it gains meaning and I think
this is tremendously tremendously
important because these are our
histories that are being stored on these
devices and by thinking about them that
way putting them in a human context
first of all what we do with our own
data is get a better understanding of
the type of information that we're
sharing but if we can do this with other
data we can put data into a human
context I think we can change a lot of
things because it builds automatically
emphasis empathy for the people involved
in these systems and that in turn
results in a fundamental respect which I
believe is missing in a large part of
technology when we start to deal with
issues like privacy by understanding
that these numbers are not just numbers
but instead they're attached they're
tethered to pieces of the real world
they carry weight by understanding that
the dialogue becomes
a lot different how many of you have
ever clicked a button that that enables
a third party to access your location
data on your phone
these people lots of you so the third
party is the developer the second party
is Apple it's the only party that never
gets access to this information is the
first party right and I think that's
because we think about these pieces of
data in this stranded abstract way we
don't put them into a context which I
think makes them a lot more important so
what I'm asking you to do is really
simple start to think about data in a
human context doesn't really take
anything when you read stock prices
think about them in a human context when
you think about mortgage reports think
about them in a human context right
there's no doubt that big data is big
business there's an industry being
developed here right think about how
well we've done in previous industries
that we've developed involving resources
not very well at all
I think part of that problem is that
we've had a lack of participation in
these dialogues from multiple pieces of
human society so the other thing that
I'm asking for is an inclusion in this
dialogue from artists from poets from
writers from people who can bring a
human element into this discussion
because I believe that this world of
data is going to be is going to be
transformative for us and unlike our
attempts with the resource industry and
our attempts for the financial industry
by people by bringing the human element
into the story I think we can take it to
tremendous places thank you
you